How did y'all think before, how did y'all feel
about what was going to be won? What did y'all think
they would take? Well, as far as some military, you
know, front of you, see,
There's one time, you know, President Nixon
ordered the bombardment of North Vietnam by B-52.
And this affects a lot of the moral of the North, you
know, the truth of what it was. But, you see, from my
point of view, I think, you know, if President
Nixon, you know, is not so busy about the election,
it's because He tried to pull out. He tried to say,
well, I can, I make peace, you know, and I can pull
the G.I. back from Vietnam. Right. Because he was
more concerned about the re-election.
Re-election, exactly. And the war itself with
Vietnam. Well, he didn't want to get out of history
without having lost the war. Yeah. See? But if we
just keep going, you know, keep pin down, you know,
with the B-52, you know, in another, you know,
maybe a week, another two weeks, you know, and then
they can bring them up, you know, to the table.
It's too useless. Even this guy will work, you
know, okay, you fire, you know, maybe three days,
and then you start to pull back. Yeah. It does
not make sense. See, Look, a man with a two-minute
fortune or five hours, you see, you can knock up
everything. Now, Americans are not authorized,
you know, to bombard, you know, the dam, you know,
or the river, you know, because over there, the
river, you know, is not enough. If there are other
big cities or anything, you know, the water's
going to flood, you know, yeah. No. Americans are
supposed to, you know, to bombard, you know, those
dams. Because, well, due to the fact also, you
know, the first, see, The old report goes there.
Sometimes, you know, they're reporting the good
side of the war. See? And they're reporting the bad
side of the war. They report, you know, once in, you
know, in the operation, you know, they report, you
know, once in, you know, they talk, you know, one of
the Germans, you know, talked to, you know, one of
the prisoners or something like that, you know.
And they take those pictures, you know, and then
they report those, you know. And due to the fact,
all over the media, you know, Blake, reports, you
know, those seats in the back homes. A lot of people
see this, you know, say, well, if D.I. goes over
there and do those seats, you know, and talk to
people and shoot
them. You're saying that I... You're saying like
another week or so they would have been able to
bring the Northern Vietnamese to the conference
table, right? I have a conviction like this, you
know, because they served for it also. They served
for it, you know, when the B-52 bombed out of the war
zone. Yeah. So there would have been an
opportunity for a compromise settlement, right?
Yeah. Like they had an opportunity for that a lot of
times. I had a question. Would the South
Vietnamese people have wanted to compromise
settlement to the water? Do you think that? How do
you feel about that? I don't think, you know, it's
time to compromise, you know, with the
government, you know. Okay, the thing is, the
North's communists never recognized, you know,
the government of the South. Or vice versa, right?
Okay, the Tsar women never recognized the
government, okay? Because the communists said
their old government is the government of the
whole Vietnam. But the government of the South,
they said, you know, set up, you know, by
emergency. Yeah. That's not real, you know, to
work with them. To work with one of the people?
Yeah. That's the way they said. That's what North
Korea said. Yeah. So why, you know, the government
on the South, you know, try to have a compromise?
Well, see, because either you exist with them, you
see, under them, or not opposed. So to exist with
them is under them. You can. You can exist with
them, because they won't last. Yeah. So what do you
think would have been the possible results of a
compromised settlement? Communist domination?
Yeah, communist domination. Well, they're the
way they are. There's no compromise with them.
Because they want to take over the South. That's
what they want. So they don't recognize any
another government. This government is not, you
know, of their own. So, when you're saying that
another week longer they would have been able to
bring them to a table? Yeah, to have, you know,
shields on top of them, you know, to... In order to
recognize the divided Vietnam, North and South?
At least, you know, they would say, well, we
negotiate, you know, and then we pull all those
troops out, and then the South Vietnamese can
leave alone. Okay, so they would go separately.
Yeah. I see.
What do you think about U.S. military tactics?
What do you think of U.S. military tactics, like
bombing the North, or the use of Agent Orange, the
defoliation of the countryside of crops? What do
you think of those tactics? American tactics used
to be used like this. I wouldn't use to fight a
conventional war, you know, with aviation, with
everything, you know, to neutralize the enemy.
But the kind of war for, you know, at least, you
know, for the beginning of the war in the South of
Vietnam, that's a very hard to fight kind of war.
The wall of war. Yeah, ghetto war. Now,
in some, what we call a displacement of war,
because the economy is more mobile, You see, they
use, sometimes they use kabocha, you know, if they
have a tooth. They use what? If they have a tooth,
see, or their, what do you call, backbone, you
know, to support their war effort. Kabocha? Yeah.
You see, by storage of ammunition and everything
there, you know. Yeah. Okay. And they, they're
more mobile. These times, and they never, they
never, you know, You might be trying, you know,
maybe camp in a jungle, but maybe underground. In
the deep underground, you know, there are command
posts, everything underground. It's hard to
detect. See? But they're not built, you know, some
kind of like camp, you know, on the surface, you
know, like we used to do. See? That's why, you know,
it's easier to make those camps, you know, a
target, you know, for artillery. So you don't
agree with the fact that these are in defoliation?
Well, defoliation, you know, the purpose of
defoliation is To deter, you know, well, because
the communists use those junkers, you know, to
hit, you know, their storage, the munitions,
everything. Now, the junkers over there, you
know, there's no way, you know, you can see. If you
fly right on top of that, there's no way you can see.
See, I'm so sick. See, and there you go, gentlemen,
you know, at their point, you know, everything
they wanted to ask, see? They came, whatever, the
gentlemen. So you think it was necessary? I think,
you know, in the war, you know, every minute, you
know, you have to do everything, I believe, for
you, you know, to deter another enemy. See, if I'm a
commander, I tell you what, you know, I agree, you
know, with Senator Goldwater, you know, about
saying, you know, I have to make firm, you know,
just bombard, you know, the whole border,
Cambodia, there will be no clean, nothing at all.
And you can see the communists, you know, they'll
give it all a high. That's all.
Well the information has an effect also, because
they kill all three and then all the phone and all
this, but you don't have choice, either you fight a
war or you don't. But if you fight a war, and
everything, because if your enemy thinks once and
for all that Why do you send a tank for? Because the
enemy may have your artillery, right? You send an
airplane because the enemy may have your
artillery. So they use the junkers, you know, as
their benefit. Why not detail those
parts?
I consider, you know, those generals just an
obstacle, you know, for the operation. Because if
you see an airplane and you see a regular airplane,
you couldn't see them. But they can see you. See, so
they're advantageous. Yeah, they can see you.
Yeah, they're the advantage for it. Yeah, because
you move in the open. And they just, you know,
hidden behind trees. Yeah. And you've been in
this, there's a plan for you. Well, how about, I
also, we learned that the Decolation of Wausau
used to cut off, I guess, the crops. Supposedly, so
that the communists wouldn't use to take the crops
from the end. Well, you see, this old part of Peru
also, because we know in some part of the country,
okay, the government couldn't control over the
crowd. But the people over there, because they're
so afraid to be killed, because the communists
said, OK, if you have Christians, you grow wheat.
You have to contribute to the communist party. So
if you let those people, you want to stop You see,
you start to know their infiltration rules. So
they try to cut their food and cut their supplies.
But the local people, you know, or the local people
in the farmland just keep supplies there, you
know, with drugs. Out of fear? Yeah. Do you think
anybody's starved because of that? Well, nobody
started that, but, you know, they're oppressed,
you know. Then they come to kill you. If you don't
give your part of your crossness to them, they
might be killed. Yeah, but I mean, if they
defoliated the cops, do you think everybody would
have a lot of people? No, I don't see, you know,
those people. You don't see those,
no. But did they keep the communists from getting
the food? Yeah, that's, well, you see, that's one
of the tactics, you know, we use in the war.
Because, like I said, the communists like, you
know, Mao Zedong they said, the communists, you
know, fight war. It's like a fish in a bowl. See,
they said a population is a water. Is a water? Yeah.
The communists is a fish. Now, the fish cannot
survive, you know, without water. So the
communist doctrine, they say, well, you fight the
war with the population support. You use the
population support. of the resource, you know,
that the population can give you. So when, you
know, the government goes to find, you have to
supply them, you know, with everything they have
to carry, you know, the food with them, right? But
the government is wrong, because they know they go
everywhere. If they dig there, they stop there,
they can, people in there, out of the field, you
know, can give them to eat. But the communists, you
know, they don't eat too much. It's, you know, just
maybe they eat only rice and things like that.
Well, of course, you know, some part of the country
went frozen. See, you had the jungle right here,
okay? And then you had, you know, rice fields over
here. Now, you spray, you know, you spray for the
jungle. But how can, you know, you stop, you know,
this, this chemical blow, you know, to the right
here? It won't blow. Well, I don't have an
accident. Yeah. Well, because we never saw in the
control area, control under the government, we
don't have any defoliation in those areas. The one
is over control area. Yeah. Those are some of the
pre-fire zones? Well, you can call something like
that, you know. It's beyond, you know, the
government's control. Well, the government
said, okay, now, people living in this area get to
do, you know, that's it. Oh, what for? Strategic
handouts? Yes. Oh, well, not strategic handouts,
you know. The strategic handouts is different.
What was that for? Well, you see, we call, you know,
just uncontrolled jobs. mostly, you know, a
general and some leaders, you know, that have
abandoned the rice fields before, you know,
because people are not living anymore there. I
mean, leaving some parts, you know, and then the
communists, you know, tried to give those parts,
you know, to their own. But we, I never see, you
know, the airplane, you know, sprayed in the You
see, because, okay, over there,
you had,
you know, people living in the city, and around the
city, and we call, you know, the secure area. Now,
the area the government can organize, you know,
security, like militia, you know, or things like
this. Then we can call it, you know, security. And
then people can work, you know. And then we didn't
have any problems with those people. Sometimes,
you know, the government helped to provide them,
you know, the attractive. to work on the fields or
provide them with fertilizer so they can increase
the ground. But they spray the government and with
another, you know, it's sprayed only in the
uncontrolled areas. Those areas are supposed to
be, you know, under the communists. So the South
Vietnamese government did it also, right? Or was
it just the Americans that did that? In the
beginning, you know, the Vietnamese
did some, but not very much. And before, you know,
the village provided protection, you know, with a
type of, you know, protection, but later on, you
know, I'm not going to do that. Well, you see, I can
see, you know, most of depoliation, you know, is
used along the Ho Chi Minh Trail, mostly. Just
mainly. Of course, you know, because Ho Chi Minh
Trail, you know, it's not like, you know, Highway
3610, and then you can see, you know, straight line
like this. Right. See, because it's hard, you
know, the trail in the jungle, you know, and then
how do you go to spray? Because you have to spray
while you say, okay, now. Yeah, you just spray, you
know, maybe 25, you know, miles a week, you know, a
day, you know. Yeah. Yeah, because there's no, a
straight line, you know, in there. Yeah. You never
know, you know, what it's going to be. Yeah. Well,
there's depredation. Well, what do you think
about the use of other chemicals? Like napalm and
other stuff. Do you think those are necessary?
Well, napalm, you know, is far over the top.
Because when you have an enemy, you know, big arm,
there's no way you can...
I, for myself, you know, I... If you hit a justified
target, then you can use all means to knock the
enemy
out. And what is justified? Is that like what it was
in Mount Seville? If the neighbor, you know,
trapped in a village sometime, because maybe only
one communist in there, only one sniper. I think
this is not necessary. You're not justified. But,
I tell you, like I said, the communists, they never
use an open, you know, fight. You see, they use the
village, you know, as their hidden position or
something, you know. Right, so they can blend in?
Yeah, they can blend, see, they can, well, if they,
they were, we're siblings, and then they just
throw the gun, and then they become siblings. They
use siblings, you know, so. But sometimes like
this, you know, it's hard. I think that's a
military point of view, you know, because... I
know, I know, you know, I didn't fight the
airplane, I didn't fight, you know, fight the
airplane, but one of the pilots, you know, one of my
students before, and they said, well, sometimes
they don't have choice. You see, because, okay,
most of the time, you know, if you come attacked,
you know, they, okay, you see, there's a village
down here. And they come in the birds.
They don't care about the people living there.
They're there, and then they get around the
funeral of the birds. And then from there, they're
shooting out. And then part of the problem is, OK,
now, we know that the communists are there, and
there's no way we can be The soldiers, you know,
cannot advance in there because they're firing at
too high. So they pop the bomb. The robots never
open. Of course, you might be killed, you know,
maybe three guys, three communists, but you might
be killed with the same amount of civilians.
Right. But because the communists, you know, they
just, you know... They don't give you any
alternative. Yeah, they don't give you any
alternative because they're just killing them. I
would think of it like that. Because, well, you
see, that's a part, you know, to fully criticize,
you know, the military conduct of the operation.
But if you're the commander of the operation, that
you don't have, you have dilemma. Okay, now, if I
can, I have the mission to deploy this target, but I
couldn't sense, you know, our troops in there,
because the heavy fire they had on us. Now, if I used
bombs, I could knock them out, because the bombs,
you know, maybe dropped in here, you know, or maybe
they just had to change their mix there. They were
killed. And then the next one I have to use, you
know, to snuggle, you know, to murder them.
So that's why, you know, it's very difficult to
find a guerrilla war.
It's not a conventional war. You can see the enemy,
see the trust, you know, the beautiful ones. You
can see them. But the guerrillas, that's very
difficult. The communists, they trained very
well, because they said, well, they can use a small
number to make a big section. But they said, well,
now they have to hide somewhere. in order to do
their mission, you know, because they have to get
used, you know, as a village, you know, as their
turn of retreat or whatever, you know, because
they say, well, they're Syrians. You see, it, it
was the most, you know, when you, when you overrun
this village that you can see all the Syrians, you
didn't know who, who's fighting and who the, the
infant people. Because they try to take this
advantage from the Americans. Because they don't
care, they don't care, you know, if the Americans,
you know, kill innocent people. Because if the
Americans kill innocent people, that's good for
them to propaganda. Right. See? So they don't
care, you know, about, you know, if you talk now on
the board, you know, for us today. because we
killed innocent people. But for them, it's a
victory for them. They say, well, they send the
airplane, they send the bomb, they maybe just kill
only one communist, but how much, you know, do
people kill? But you don't have choice. Look at
this kind of world, you know, you don't have
choice. Okay.
There's some questions like, I don't know, they
don't really fit in there, but... I just have two
questions. You said something about propaganda.
Was there any U.S. propaganda during the war? Or
was there freedom of press in South Carolina?
Well, in South Carolina, we have freedom of press.
Well, absolutely. Absolutely, really, you know,
freedom like you. Because, okay, over there, the
press, These are under the information service.
OK, the press is part of the government, the agent,
the process. You know, like here, the President
Reagan had the press, you know, how do you call it?
Press conference. Yeah, press conference. You
see,
every time, you know, the president had one of the
staff and the president, you know, to make a
conference for the press conference. Over there,
the government had some of those under the
information, you know, agency. Okay? So there's
some time, you know, you cannot You cannot preach,
you know, like here, like the freedom you can tell
everything. See? The country is doing the work.
See? You have some limited, you know, freedom, but
you cannot, you know, say everything against the
government, because the government tried to do
the best it can, even though, in other words, you
know, propaganda by the communists already. Now,
you don't want to do something more, you know,
that's worse than this, you know, so you just, you
know, like you make it for the end, you know, for the
company. Yeah. Well, another word, you know, the
process is freedom, some sort, but not, you know,
totally, you know, like here, you know, that you
can say everything you want to. Yeah. the events of
the war to the people? Were people aware of what was
going on? Well, we put, you know, well we do have,
you know, information, you know, like different
province and different kind of country. We have
people using service in the government, in front
of people and, you know, what's going on, you know,
with the aid program, you know, from the United
States and all this and all that, and some of the
programs, you know, the government, you know,
worked towards, you know, for the, for increasing
the growth, you know, for irrigation, something
like that, you know. And in the meantime, you know,
we have the work, you know, information, and so we
can have a picture, you know, a good village, you
know, was overrun by the communists, you know. Did
religion have
any effect on the war, did you say? Oh, well, in
the, well, there's,
you see in the city, in the Saigon itself, you know,
we had the religion,
you know, what we call, you know, uprising,
because, you see, the Buddhist religion, some of
the leaders of the Buddhist religion, They think,
you know, they said, well, the president's
doing, you know, it's, uh, it's don't respect, you
know, human rights, you know, because they
detained, you know, dissident, you know,
political dissident. And, uh, and, you know, the,
uh, Buddhism is one of the religions that does not
believe in violence and Buddhism, they might be
not aware of how the Communists believe in
religion. Some of the Buddhism leaders think,
well, if we can compromise with the Communists, we
might have peace.
So, and that was, in a way, we had, I mean, we had a
type of religion, you know, that just against, you
know, they tried to, you can see, you know, I don't
know if you watch TV, you know, a day, and you see all
the monks, you know, try to demonstrate, you know,
against the government. Because this is simply
for the prologue, because of the music, right?
Because I think, you know, Bowling Green
is not too well-known. But the problem, you know,
is the president, you know, he had, you know, his
bribe, you know, worked for him. And he cannot act
alone, you know, because his bribe is like, you
know, a political army. The people,
you know, began to know his story. They go, oh, his
story, you know, had too much football to use, and,
of course, you know, he had so many problems, you
know, scandals, you know, people, you know,
scandals, you know, typhoons, you know,
scandals. And that's why, you know, before the
story of the president, you know, the movie scene,
the typhoon, Well,
it's like,
you know, to demonstrate,
you know, and to tell, you know, because
the president is, you know, he's cold, you know,
he's not, you know, he's just sitting around with
the same kind of people, you know. All this, well,
you can tell those people, though, Because only
religious people, because they think the
country, you know, can
have compromise, you know, with the communists.
But it's not true. Because the communists are
children, you know, they want us, you know, to be
religious. Right, right. And they had so-called,
you know, actually, they didn't have some peace,
you know, over Congress. But, those, those peace,
you know, it's, it's more or less, you know, it's
about a propaganda program, you know, that's not
going to have the freedom to talk to, you know,
those people.
See, because everything in the communist now, you
see, like another day, I watched in TV, they think
that a couple of Americans, it's not, you know, a,
not a veteran, both come back from Vietnam War,
well, more than a veteran, they become civilians,
and they came to visit the North Vietnamese. Who,
who they were? Well, some of the Americans, you
know, veterans. The poor boys? Yeah. And you know
what they told them? They told them to go to a wrong
place, you know, they saw all the trophies,
you know, all the American airplanes, they were
shut down, and then they just moved on. And if they
were making them, it's serious. I don't
know, he fired a policeman. It was huge, you know,
sometimes, you know, they had to take a very rich
policeman. Yeah. And, um, and those guys, you
know, and, um, there were other, both times, you
know, there were very nice people, you know, not
getting on the very time, you know, you know. We
feel sorry because we tend to come back, you know,
you know, those innocent people, you know, that.
But they don't realize, you know, who in the world.
And those are the same people, you know, that
intend, you know, to fight, to fight, you know.
Every single population is one fighter.
Everybody had it. Yeah. You see, every woman in
North Carolina, they're not the only child.
They're not the only ones. They're children, but
they have to go. See, they walked in the rice
fields, and they have to go. Every time there's an
airplane, they have to go along for the airplane
time. And everybody, you know, got to go and shoot
at the airport. One more question then. I don't
know if you answered this. Can you give me a
personal account of your last day in Vietnam? How
you felt about what happened and what you thought
about the future? The future of Vietnam? Yeah,
just overall.
Well,
see,
I don't think, you know, times,
you know, that Iran has become, you know, a free
country, you
know, unless there may be change, you know, in the
global world, you
know, because, Now, Vietnam, you know, has a big
communist China, you know, right at the back. Now,
it's not, it's, China becomes not communist, you
know. but might we have a chance, you know, the
Vietnam, you know, leader, a communist Vietnam,
you know, might be, might be a little more, you
know, flexible. More freedom? You know, more, I
don't, I don't, I don't say freedom, you know,
because it's communist, you know, you don't have
freedom. But, but otherwise, you know, The North
Vietnam, the time of Vietnam, it didn't hit the
bush as much as it did before. I didn't see anything
in the sea. You didn't see anything in the sea? So
you were very pessimistic for them? For mine, you
know, I can think of me when I look. Actually, you
know, There are some movements,
you know, the Vilnius, you know, try to fight, you
know, back with the communists, but they don't
have any support. They don't have any support
then, because the only country that can support
them is the United States. But I don't think, you
know, the United States, you know, will find
anywhere in Vietnam, you know, by helping the
Vilnius. Because for Vietnam, you know, it's
very, very rough. The one thing, the future, you
know, that I can see,
well, sooner or later,
the United States, you know, will have relations,
you know, with the Communist Party, you know, like
the work that we're working on in the Gulf, in this
country. And I don't know, you know, what the
United States can
do again, you know, in relation to the economy of
Vietnam. I don't see any benefits, you know. But
there will be benefits for Vietnam, won't there?
Neither, I don't think. Neither? Well, for the
people living over there,
well, actually...
Okay, if they have diplomatic relations with
China, now it depends on what kind of relations,
you know, if all is cultural, um over here you know
this is
Unless, you know, though there's little of that
change, you know, there's a whole concept. You
say, well, now if we, we
just try to, you know, to have some relations with
the United States, you know, we might be, you know,
tonight, you know, have to rebuild the country,
or, you know, to have something like that. Yeah. I
don't think so, because they're so, they're so
tied up, you know, with rituals, you know, with
traditions. Yeah. And then you become so, you
know, like, you become polite, you know, with
rituals. Like here, in this part of the country,
you know, you think one of these days, you know,
people come to us and say, okay, now, we're going to
sit down and talk to them, you know.
I don't think so.
As long as they lead
to worship. I don't know how many
millions, you know, every year, you know, to go out
and get, you know. So, I don't think
that's simply, you know, to say, okay, now, come
on, you know, relations, the kind of relations,
you know, you know, I wish I could, you know, you
know.
See, for us, you know, for us, it's easy. We came
over here. And,
well, there's some people, you
know, who didn't have, you know, one day, you know,
a good one, because, you know, it's not, you know,
liberal or whatever, you know, so they can come
back to the bed. For me, I didn't do that. Yeah, no,
you already got that. I don't believe it. Because,
you know, because when a communist country
becomes like Cuba,
you can go back in there and you know, it's
religious. But you don't have
any protection. Yeah. Especially since it's not a
country. Relations to the country, right? Yeah.
Because, uh, You see, actually, I can see, you
know, the relationship between the two
countries. I don't, I don't see, you know, a very
good relationship, you know, like the United
States with the,
with other countries, you know, in the future.
Sure. Because maybe another country like Romania
or Czechoslovakia can have a good relationship
with the United States.
Because for my thinking,
another state think if they had good relation with
the economy of Vietnam, There might be more
information about
Buddhism. But I don't know.
I don't think so. The communists, you know, can use
this as a tactic. Even this guy, you know, he was a
prisoner. He was, you know, a prisoner of war. But
the communists, you know, fought to leave over
there. And they had families. Even
though I've been married with one of the
Vietnamese, but I don't have children. Then you
can say, well, this guy, you know, he's a, he's a,
he's an American because he, he decides to live
here because he has a wife and kids. That's
perfect.
It took a lot of time. I don't know. I could talk. I
don't know about it.
Testing one two three four is this coming in loud
and clear testing one two three four